[Music]
ten National Security Council
the National Security Council evolved
from efforts begun in 1944 for the
unification of the Armed Services and
culminating in the National Security Act
of 1947 both the council and its
centralized intelligence coordinating
sub agency generally developed from the
National Intelligence Authority Central
Intelligence Group experience and a
principle study of post-war defense
organization matters prepared at the
suggestion of Senator David Walsh
Democrat Massachusetts chairman of the
Senate Committee on naval affairs for
Secretary of the Navy James V Forrestal
by New York investment broker Ferdinand
ever Stott footnote C US Congress Senate
Committee on naval affairs unification
of the war and navy departments and
post-war Organization for National
Security Committee print 79th Congress
first session Washington US government
print off US 1945 and footnote while
numerous other reorganization ideas
would follow the ever stat report quote
recommended the maintenance of three
departments war air and navy with each
having a civilian secretary a civilian
undersecretary and a commanding officer
a National Security Council composed of
the secretaries of War Navy and Air the
chairman of the National Security
Resources Board Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff and a permanent
Secretariat would be established to
facilitate interagency clearances in the
absence of the President the Vice
President or the Secretary of State
would preside as chairman the duties of
the Council would be to exercise
critical policy forming and advisory
functions in the setting up of foreign
and military policy a Central
Intelligence Agency was to be made a
constituent part of the council's
organization with the Joint Chiefs of
Staff serving as the principal
coordinating unit the latter would be
given statutory authority permitting it
to advise the council on strategy
budgetary problems and logistics and
quote footnote Edward a
Hobbs behind the president a study of
executive office agencies Washington
Public Affairs press 1954 page 129 in
footnote as initially established in
1947 the council was an independent
agency with the membership including the
president the secretaries of state
defense Army Air Navy and the chairman
of the now-defunct National Security
Resources Board with the option that the
chief executive might also include the
heads of two other special defense units
now expired two years later the
membership of the council was overhauled
to include the president the vice
president the secretaries of state and
defense the chairman of the National
Security Resources Board and certain
other defense officials which the chief
executive might specify as members
subject to Senate confirmation also in
accordance with reorganization plan
number four of 1949 the council was
formerly located within the executive
office of the president two aspects of
NSC organization and operation are of
interest to this study staff growth and
activities and coordination mechanisms
developed under the auspices of the
council the general staffing pattern of
the NSC would appear to be a movement
from a small Secretariat to a large
professionalized body competing with the
bureaucracies of the defense and foreign
policy agencies and departments for
access to the president the availability
of the chief executive to the NSC staff
has been enhanced by the decline of the
council's executive secretary and
virtual replacement by a presidential
assistant for national security matters
the creation of various coordination
mechanisms reporting to the council
where the chief executive presides or
directly to the president has also
increased the influence of this staff
with the man in the White House under
President Truman who did not make
extensive use of the panel the NSC staff
quote a small body of permanent council
employees and officers detailed
temporarily from the participating
agencies
was headed by a non-political civilian
executive secretary appointed by the
president
an anonymous servant of the council in
the words of the first executive
secretary Sidney W sours a broker of
ideas and criss-crossing proposals among
a team of responsible officials he
carried NSC recommendations to the
president briefed the chief executive
daily on NSC and intelligence matters
and maintained his NSC files and served
in effect as his administrative
assistant for national security affairs
the organization of the NSC staff was
flexible and as the council developed
changed to meet new needs in general
during the pre Korean period it
consisted of three groups first was the
office of the executive secretary and
the Secretariat composed of permanent
NSC employees which performed the
necessary basic functions of preparing
agenda circulating papers and recording
actions next was the staff consisting
almost entirely of officials detailed on
a full-time basis by departments and
agencies represented on the council and
headed by coordinator detailed from the
State Department who was supported in
turn by a permanent assistant this body
developed studies and policy
recommendations for NSC consideration
the third group consisted of consultants
to the executive secretary the chief
policy and operational planners for each
council agency thus the head of the
policy planning staff represented the
State Department the director joint
staff represented the Department of
Defense and so forth and quote late in
July 1950 President Truman ordered a
reorganization and strengthening of the
council attendance at NSC sessions was
limited to statutory members and five
other specifically designated officials
the secretary of the Treasury the
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
the director of Central Intelligence a
special assistant to the president
W Averell Harriman and a special
consultant
to the president Sidney W sours together
with the executive secretary James s lay
jr. footnote by this time the council's
statutory membership had been altered by
a statutory amendment to the National
Security Act of 1947 and the panel had
been officially located within the
executive office of the President and
footnote quote the president also
directed a reshuffling of the NSC staff
the permanent Secretariat remained but
the staff and consultants were replaced
by a senior staff and staff assistants
the senior staff was composed of
representatives of state defense NS RB
Treasury JC s and CIA and shortly
thereafter of herriman's office and
headed by the executive secretary an
official without departmental ties
members were generally of assistant
secretary level or higher and in turn
designated their staff assistants the
senior staff participated closely and
actively in the work of the council not
only did it continue the functions of
the staff but it also took over
responsibility for projects formerly
assigned to ad hoc NSC committees it
thus provided the council with
continuous support by a high level
interdepartmental staff group the staff
assistants who did most of the basic
work for the senior staff spent a large
part of their time in their respective
agencies where they could better absorb
agency views and bring them to the fore
during the developmental phase of NSC
papers the position of the executive
secretary moreover as chairman of the
senior staff and also head of the
permanent NSC staff in the White House
gave that official an intimate view of
the president's opinions and desires
that he could bring to bear quite early
in the planning process and finally JC s
and Treasury representation on the NSC
staff filled needs that had been long
felt end quote with the arrival of the
Eisenhower administration
council was transformed into a highly
organized and enlarged forum for the
formulation of both national defence and
foreign policy auxilary coordination
units were added to the NSC structure
and the panel's factual research and
policy paper production was supervised
by the first officially designated
presidential assistant for national
security matters Robert Cutler James s
lay jr. continued as the council's
executive secretary footnote Cutler's
official title first appearing in the
government organization manual for 1954
was special assistant to the president
for national security affairs and was
listed in both the White House office
staff and National Security Council
staff stress must be placed upon this
being an official title for certainly
other presidential aides had been
regarded as assistants for national
security matters thus one finds for
example President Truman writing that
when Admiral William de l'Est he retired
as White House chief of staff in March
I brought Admiral sours to the White
House in the new capacity of special
assistant to the president for
intelligence officially Sowers was
executive secretary of the NSC Truman
page 58 in footnote most of this
machinery disappeared in 1961 however
with the arrival of the Kennedy
administration and the NSC became but
one of several means by which foreign
policy and defense problems might be
scrutinized quote normally the president
assigned the preparation of a study or
recommendation to a cabinet official or
one of his top subordinates this
official in turn was responsible for
obtaining other departmental views and
checking and coordinating with other
responsible individuals sometimes he did
this within small interdepartmental
groups specially created to study the
problem sometimes by arranging for
subordinates and each interested agency
to develop the matter where appropriate
this included close consultation with
the budget bureau fiscal matters were
considered
during the development of a study and in
drawing up recommendations and proposals
papers no longer had separate financial
appendices the completed report included
not only the responsible officials own
analysis and recommendations for action
but also a full statement of any
differing views held by other agencies
or individuals this was true whether the
report was prepared by one person or by
a special task force the final version
presented to President Kennedy at a
formal meeting of the NSC or within
smaller or larger panel or subcommittee
meetings was then discussed and if
necessary debated further before the
president made his decision once the
chief executive approved a specific
recommendation the responsible agency or
department made a written record of the
decision and the head of that agency or
a high-level action officer was charged
with overseeing its implementation end
quote
president kennedy did not however
discard the special assistants role in
council operations and national security
matters quote the special assistant to
the president for national security
affairs mcgeorge bundy also played an
important role in the national security
process not only was he a top
presidential adviser but as overall
director of the NSC staff he
participated in all council related
activities he and his assistants had a
variety of responsibilities in addition
to their normal Secretariat functions
they suggested areas for consideration
and the mechanisms for handling these
and other problems followed studies
through the planning stage and saw that
they were properly coordinated staffed
and responsive to the needs and desires
of the president ensured that a written
record was made of all decisions whether
they were reached at formal NSC meetings
or at other top conferences and kept
tabs on the implementation of whatever
policy had been adopted in this work
Bundy and the NSC staff coordinated
closely with other parts of the
presidential staff and the budget bureau
performed whatever liaison was necessary
and met freq
with the president and at regular White
House staff meetings formal NSC meetings
were held often but irregularly
sometimes as frequently as three times a
week and usually at least once every two
weeks in the first half year of the
Kennedy administration for example the
council met 16 times many matters that
have been considered at regular NSC
meetings under Eisenhower were now
handled in separate meetings of the
president with secretaries Rusk and
McNamara or with a single cabinet
officer or in committees of the NSC that
included only some of the statutory
members but also several of their top
deputies or other government officials
or at meetings below the presidential
level end quote
while President Johnson largely
continued to operate in much the same
manner as his predecessor with regard to
national security matters
President Nixon significantly altered
these arrangements by investing a great
deal of autonomy in his assistant for
national security affairs granting that
agent a large staff responsible to his
personal supervision the NSC executive
secretary position remained vacant
during the Nixon tenure quote when
Kissinger came to Washington he told a
number of people of his determination to
concentrate on matters of general
strategy and leave operations to the
departments some dismissed this as the
typical disclaimer of a new White House
staff man yet much in kissinger's
writings suggests that his intention to
devote himself to broad policy was real
he had repeatedly criticized our
government's tendency to treat problems
as isolated cases and to identify
foreign policy with the solution of
immediate issues rather than developing
an interconnected strategy for coping
with the world over a period of years
and his emphasis was primarily on
problems of decision making he defined
the problem basically in terms of how to
get the government to settle on its
major policy priorities and strategy and
had been slow to recognize the
difficulty of getting the bureaucracy
to implement such a strategy once said
Kissinger found a kindred spirit and a
president who's campaigning had
denounced the Kennedy Johnson the
emphasis on formal national security
planning in favor of catch-as-catch-can
Talk fests and the system he put
together for Nixon is designed above all
to facilitate and illuminate major
presidential foreign policy choices well
over 100 NS SMS national security study
memoranda have been issued by the White
House to the various Foreign Affairs
government agencies calling for analysis
of major issues and development of
realistic alternative policy options on
them these studies are cleared through a
network of general interdepartmental
committees responsible to Kissinger and
the most important issues they raise are
argued out before the president in the
National Security Council Nixon then
makes a decision from among the options
usually after further private
deliberation end quote
while the NSC itself may not have met
any more frequently under President
Nixon than it did during the Kennedy
Johnson regimes the council served as an
important coordinating mechanism for dr.
Kissinger in centralizing and affirming
his control over national security and
intelligence matters as in the
eisenhower period a variety of auxilary
panels were created for special aspects
of security policy these were chaired by
Kissinger and provided staff support by
his NSC personnel the principal
auxiliary units not all for some
undoubtedly were never publicly
acknowledged and a definitive list is
not otherwise known to exist associated
with the council since its creation are
discussed below on May 10th
1949 President Truman announced the
creation of two panels which would flank
the NSC structure the first of these the
interdepartmental committee on internal
security was chaired initially by the
special assistant to the Attorney
General with representatives from the
Department of State defense and Treasury
as well as the NSC the last and an
advisor observer capacity large
paper structure this body has been
almost totally inactive during the past
decade nevertheless responsibility for
its operations currently lies with the
head of the Internal Security section of
the Criminal Division Department of
Justice the interdepartmental
intelligence conference the other unit
established by President Truman was
initially headed by J Edgar Hoover
director of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation and counted among its
members the heads of Army Navy and Air
Force intelligence agencies and an NSC
representative the last again in an
advisor observer capacity slightly more
active than the counterpart internal
security panel the conference has since
the death of director Hoover been
maintained by a secretariat within the
Federal Bureau of Investigation both of
these entities one predominantly
military and the other largely civilian
in scope are responsible for
coordinating certain investigations of
domestic espionage counter espionage
sabotage subversion and related internal
security matters because the
differentiation between their
jurisdiction is not altogether clear
fundamental disagreements between them
over such matters are settled by the NSC
however in view of the inactivity of
these units it would seem that few
disputes over jurisdiction have been
taken to the council recently by these
panels in June 1951 a psychological
strategy board was established by
presidential directive supplanting an
earlier board created in the Department
of State under assistant secretary
Edward W Barrett the new panel attempted
to determine the psychological
objectives of the United States and
coordinated and evaluated the work of
operating psychological warfare agencies
under the terms of its Charter the board
was obligated to report to the National
Security Council on its activities and
on its evaluation of the National
psychological operations including
implementation of approved objectives
policies and programs by the departments
and agencies concern
composed of the Undersecretary of State
the Deputy Secretary of Defense and the
director of Central Intelligence or
their designee x' and such other
representatives as determined by them
the unit was ultimately abolished on
September 2nd 1953 when reorganization
plan number 8 of that year established
the United States Information Agency
which assumed the functions of the board
finding a need for improving the manner
in which NSC policies were carried out
president eisenhower created the
operations Coordinating Board in
September 1953 which after the chief
executive approved a policy submitted by
the council was to consult with the
agencies involved as to quote a their
detailed operational planning
responsibilities respecting such policy
be the coordination of the
interdepartmental aspects of the
detailed operational plans developed by
the agencies to carry out such policy C
the timely and coordinated execution of
such policy and plans and D the
execution of each security action or
project so that it shall make its full
contribution to the attainment of
national security objectives and to the
particular climate of opinion the United
States is seeking to achieve in the
world and II initiate new proposals for
action within the framework of national
security policies in response to
opportunity and changes in the situation
end quote
in addition to the Undersecretary of
state who acted as chairman the panel
consisted of the Deputy Secretary of
Defense the director of foreign
operations and the director of Central
Intelligence the special assistant to
the president for national security
affairs might attend any session of the
board on his own volition and the
director of the United States
Information Agency was to advise the
body upon request in his efforts at
streamlining the national security
structure
President Kennedy terminated the board
in February 1961 the Forty committee
also known as the special group the 5412
group and the 303 committee
was established by a secret NSC order
number 50 4/12 and derived from an
informal operations Coordinating Board
luncheon group created sometime in 1955
the panel has had a varying membership
but has reportedly included the Director
of Central Intelligence the
Undersecretary of State for political
affairs the secretary and deputy
secretary of defense and during the past
decade the chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff and the presidential assistant
for national security affairs during the
past three administrations the
president's national security assistant
is thought to have chaired the group's
sessions according to one Authority it
is this unit which makes policies which
walk the tightrope between peace and war
another source credits the committee
with holding authority on the execution
of CIA clandestine operations footnote
Victor Marchetti and John D marks the
CIA and the cult of intelligence New
York Alfred a knob 1974 pages 325
through 327 this currently controversial
account of Central Intelligence Agency
and foreign intelligence community
operations contains the most recent and
detailed publicly available statistical
estimates regarding federal intelligence
resources and footnote in this latter
regard the group functions as a shield
against claims that the chief executive
directly approved some morally
questionable clandestine activity this
function of the panel would not however
seem to excuse the president from his
constitutional obligation to quote take
care that the laws be faithfully
executed end quote
footnote C US Congress Senate Select
Committee to study governmental
operations with respect to intelligence
activities alleged assassination plots
involving foreign leaders committee
print 94th Congress first session
Washington US government print off US
1975 pages 9 through 13
end footnote with the arrival of the
Nixon administration in 1969
dr. Kissinger instituted three new NSC
coordinating mechanisms the under
secretaries committee initially headed
by Undersecretary of State John and
Erwin was originally designed as the
chief implementing body to carry out
many but not all presidential NSC
directives but according to a 1971
evaluation the panel's actual importance
never very great continues to lapse
quote another is the senior review group
now 1971 had an undersecretary level and
chaired by Kissinger which usually gives
final approval to the NSC steady
memoranda after making sure that all
realistic alternatives are presented end
quote
the third entity the Washington's
special actions group included as
members as of late 1971 the Attorney
General the director of Central
Intelligence the Deputy Secretary of
Defense the chairman of the Joint Chiefs
and the Undersecretary of State for
political affairs it functions as
top-level operations center for sudden
crises and emergencies on November 5th
1971 the White House announced
additional reorganization efforts with
regard to the intelligence community the
net outcome of which was the
establishment of three more NSC panels
quote a National Security Council
Intelligence Committee chaired by the
assistant to the president for national
security affairs it's members include
the Attorney General the DCI director of
Central Intelligence the Undersecretary
of state the deputy secretary of defense
and the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff the committee will give direction
and guidance on national intelligence
needs and provide for a continuing
evaluation of intelligence products from
the viewpoint of the intelligence user a
net assessment group within the National
Security Council staff the group is
headed by a senior staff member and is
responsible for reviewing and evaluating
all intelligence products and for
producing net assessments an
intelligence resore
Advisory Committee chaired by the DCI
including as members a senior
representative from the Department of
State the Department of Defense the
Office of Management and Budget and the
Central Intelligence Agency this
committee advises the DCI on the
preparation of a consolidated
intelligence program budget end quote
footnote see weekly compilation of
presidential documents v7 November 8th
1971 and put note these units together
with the above-named groups and the
verification panel which is responsible
for monitoring the intelligence related
to the strategic arms limitation talks
and is chaired by dr. Kissinger
constitute the major NSC affiliates of
interest to this study unless otherwise
noted all of these entities are
officially operative though in some
instances they exhibit little functional
activity
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you